---
title: A Brief History of Workers' Rights in the American 20th Century
layout: about
permalink: /essay-02.html
---

{% include feature/nav-menu.html sections="Introduction;Conclusion;Notes" %}

# A Brief History of Worker Right in the American 20th Century
## Introduction
America’s working conditions were not always safe or fair. By the early 20th century, most employees in America were overworked and underpaid for their labor. This caused many progressive-minded activists to fight for better working conditions and fair pay. Over the course of 70 years, working conditions would drastically change for the average American worker. By the end of the 20th Century, conditions would be nothing like they were in their earlier counterparts. This essay will discuss some of the most notable victories in the fight for workers' rights and some lesser-known conflicts that did not always succeed. This is a brief history of working conditions in the American 20th Century.
  
{% include feature/image.html filename="frick 2.png" alt="Pinkertons surrender to the workers of the Homestead Steel Mill" caption="Pinkertons surrender to the workers of the Homestead Steel Mill" width="100" link="https://pitt.libguides.com/c.php?g=12523&p=66319" %}
  
# Fort Frick
 One of the less notable fights for workers' rights was the Homestead strikes. The Homestead strikes were a series of riots between workers and the Carnegie Steel company. The men in charge of the Carnegie steel company were Andrew Carnegie and Henry Clay Frick. It all began in 1892 when the workers of the Homestead Steel Mill received a wage cut. The workers (who were all a part of a union) began to strike. Operations Manager Henry Frick responded to the strike by firing all 3,800 workers. Soon after firing his workers, Frick hired 300 Pinkerton detectives to occupy the plant. The workers knew the Pinkertons were trying to defend the plant, so in response, the workers all rushed to the plant to stop the Pinkertons. What happened next was a bloodbath. When the detectives’ boat landed, the detectives opened fire on the crowd with Winchesters. The workers returned fire and started a shootout. Workers would hold a defensive line behind steel billets. After a few hours of stalemate, the workers sent a representative out to the shore to negotiate. He yelled from the beach into the boat: “On behalf of 5,000 men, I beg of you to leave here at once. I don’t know who you are or whence you came, but I do know that you have no business here, and if you remain here, there will be more bloodshed. We, the workers in these mills, are peaceably inclined. We have not damaged any property and we intend not to.” The Captain responded from the boat and said: “ Men, we are Pinkerton detectives. We were sent here to take possession of this property and guard it for the company. We don't wish to shed blood, but we are determined to go up there and shall do so. If you men don't withdraw, we will mow every one of you down and enter in spite of you. You had better disperse, for land we will!”  An hour and a half passed in a silent standoff between the workers and the Pinkertons before the Pinkertons finally started to get out of their boats. As soon as they began to make their way, The detectives met them with a volley of shots from the workers. The Pinkertons returned to tier boats and started to shoot back. A gunfight between the workers and the Pinkertons broke out and lasted until Noon the next day until the Pinkertons Surrendered. Then, Henry Frick got the Governor to Send the National Guard, and the plant was relinquished to the workers. In the end, the Union gave in to reduced wages and 12-hour days, for their violent treatment against Pinkerton agents took away their public support. If this strike was unsuccessful, then why talk about it? At this point in American history, it was very difficult to fight wealthy business owners because of the influence they had. They could influence the police and government officials to end strikes violently, a sort of terrorism to a degree. This made many people scared to stand up and ask for better conditions and pay[^1]. 
# Child Labor

{% include feature/image.html filename="Child labor.JPG" alt="A small child toils away in a factory" caption="A young girl working at a cotton mill" width="100" link="https://www.flickr.com/photos/usnationalarchives/7496082984/in/photostream/" %}

In the early 1900s, most industrial jobs did not pay well enough to make ends meet for the average family. To cope with this, many American families would send their children to work. The conditions these children faced were grim. Children would be sent to work at 6 years old or even younger sometimes. They faced long hours, dirty and unsafe conditions, very little schooling, and a very small amount of income. In an issue of Harpers Weekly in 1910, a Texan Cotton farmer was asked how picking cotton affected his child laborers. He responded: “Of course it- it destroys their vitality.” By 1913, there were 27,000 workers under the age of 16 in Massachusetts alone. Many of these children would work for 8-10 hours a day with no breaks. Child workers were also favored in textile shops, where little hands and fingers could squeeze into machines that adult hands couldn’t. This would sometimes result in children losing limbs and getting caught in machines. The child mortality rate for working-class children was around 40% at this time.  At one point, the federal government was spending more money on the Bureau of Animal and Plant industry, rather than the Children’s Bureau. The Children Bureau’s purpose was to investigate and report counts of Infant Mortality, Birth-rate, physical handicaps, orphanage, juvenile delinquency, dangerous occupations, accidents, and disease in working-class children. They would work very long and very hard to better working conditions for children or outright advocate for the abolition of child labor. Though it was extremely unethical, child labor was completely legal in America and would not be fully abolished until 1938 with the Fair Labor Standards Act. This would be some of the final New Deal legislation that was passed, and the FLSA would not only ban child labor but also put federal regulations on working hours and wages to better protect America’s workers[^2]. 
# The Ludlow Massacre

{% include feature/image.html filename="ludlow.JPG" alt="Aftermath of Ludlow Tent Fire" caption="Aftermath of Ludlow Tent Fire" width="100" link="https://www.flickr.com/photos/35740357@N03/11191749246/" %}

The Ludlow Massacre was an event that happened in April 1914 in Ludlow, Colorado. It was an attack on striking coal miners and their families from Colorado Fuel and Iron Company guards. The event occurred when 10,000 miners had been on strike since September; they protested low pay and horrible working conditions. An eyewitness account stated: “Since last September, these people had been taught nothing but peace. Their leaders had told them day after day that they could never hope to make the disinterested citizen understand their side of the controversy unless they strictly obeyed every law and "attended to their own business.”  The workers were under the United Mine Workers of America (UMWA). Since they were evicted from the town they lived in, these workers had created a tent colony outside of the plant. The national guard was stationed around the tent colony and the plant to keep violence to a minimum, but it didn’t work out as planned. On April 19th, 1914, gunshots rang out over the tent colony. Eyewitness accounts state: “Women, driven almost insane, ran like frightened hares into caves dug for their safety, their babes clutching frantically at their breasts, their older children tearing at their skirts, while around them fell the explosive bullets of the gunmen- militiamen.” Fighting continued throughout the day until the workers ran out of ammunition. Workers and their families retreated into the countryside or hid in cellars dug beneath their tents. Unfortunately, national guard troops then soaked the tents in kerosene and burned anyone still inside alive. 11 children and two women’s charred remains were found in one Cellar. The coal miners had lost this battle, but overall it was a victory for workers' rights because public attention was set on John D Rockafeller, the mastermind behind it all. The incident turned John D Rockafeller into a national villain and would symbolize a wave of industrial violence that would eventually lead to progressive era reforms in labor[^3].
# Henry Ford's Five Day Work Week

{% include feature/image.html filename="ford.JPG" alt="Henry Ford's Factory in Dearborn, Michigan" caption="Henry Ford's Factory in Dearborn, Michigan" width="100" link="https://www.loc.gov/pictures/resource/fsa.8b00276/" %}

In the early 20th century, it was pretty common to have a six-day workweek with 12 hour workdays. It was exhausting workers and gave them very little free time, but this was changed with Henry Ford’s five-day workweek in 1914. At first, Ford was scoffed at for this move, for many people thought it would result in financial ruin. The opposite was true. Ford saw his production increase because of the overall better conditions for his workers. He could also employ more people, increasing the number of jobs in his factory. Editors of the Herald in 1922 praised Ford for his endeavor and said: “Henry Ford’s Five day week maybe only other proof that his business genius blazes undimmed upon his own automobile industry in which he is the world’s incomparable inventor, manufacturer, and publicity agent.” Ford’s factory efficiency increased due to the well-being of his workers; in contrast to this, many iron and steelworkers at the time were still working 12 hours a day for seven days a week. Henry Ford would also not discriminate against substandard men. Bedridden men could work in Ford’s factories and earn an honest wage. Legless, armless, and even blind men could work for a full day's pay, whereas they could be subject to the reduced payment due to their conditions if they had worked somewhere else. Another way Henry Ford bettered his working conditions was the implementation of a minimum wage in his factories. Every man would earn 5 dollars a day, or 6 dollars in you were grandfathered in (Working in his factory before he implemented a minimum wage in 1914). This was enough money for the average man's decent quality of life. Henry Ford was not a perfect man, though; in 1919, Henry Ford bought his newspaper in Michigan. There were no advertisements in this paper, but instead, it was entirely financed by the Ford Motor company. Henry Ford used this newspaper to outlet his opinions to the public. Unfortunately, Henry Ford was an antisemite and would write hateful slander in his newspaper. Then it would be read all over the country, with articles such as The International Jew, The World’s Foremost Problem. Later in his life, he would become a famous ally to the nazi party before WW2 and personally met Hitler, who gifted him a Grand Cross of the German Eagle, the highest honor that was given to a foreigner by the Nazi party. Though Henry Ford was not a good example of a man, he was a great example of business philosophies. Thanks to Henry Ford, the five-day work week and eight-hour days are now commonplace in the American Workplace[^4].
# Women at Work

{% include feature/image.html filename="women at work.JPG" alt="Women learning 'War work'" caption="Women learning about war work in a vocational school" width="100" link="https://www.flickr.com/photos/35740357@N03/5531929109/" %}

When the united states declared war on Japan on December 8th, and then Germany on December 11th, it meant one thing, America would have to send a large number of men overseas to fight, weakening the American workforce. “Craft jobs” were traditional “men’s jobs” that women didn't usually work. Women typically worked in manufacturing and in clerical sales, but with the war happening, there were fewer men to call upon to work. This paved the way for women to be involved in the war effort and the workforce like they never had before. The U.S. War Manpower Commission (WAC) created The Women's Advisory Committee to organize women employees as efficiently as possible in the war effort. The WAC also published literature that would try to destigmatize the idea of a working woman. The stigma was that only African American and working Class women would work, so the WAC went to great lengths to try and employ married middle-class women. There were massive propaganda campaigns that would print posters that would praise working women, with phrases such as: “Women Workers Will Win The War.” Other organizations such as the Women’s Bureau would inspect factory conditions where women worked. Industrial accidents were alarmingly high in the 40s, and by 1944, there had been over 7,500 deaths in industrial factories. This caused a big push for factory safety for women in particular, with the Office of War Information publishing documents that instructed women to wear protective shoes or boots to work, and how to tie their hair up in bandanas so it would not get caught in machines. All of this effort to destigmatize women in the workforce was successful. By the year 1940, around 10 percent of white married women between the ages of 45-and 54 were employed, by the year 1950 it had risen to 22%. That's more than twice the previous amount. When the war was over, all the men came home, and unfortunately, many women were laid off from the jobs they had been working for years and those jobs were given back to men. But the WAC’s work was not undone, for had sewn the seeds for normalizing women in the workforce for years to come[^5].
# The Fair Labor Standards Act

{% include feature/image.html filename="fdr.JPG" alt="FDR giving one of his 'Fireside Chats'," caption="FDR giving one of his "Fireside Chats'" width="100" link="https://www.loc.gov/pictures/item/2016883737/resource/" %}

The Fair Labor Stnadards Act is perhaps the greatest achievements for workers rights in the past 100 years. The FLSA was a part of New Deal legislation passed in 1938. It enforced a federal minimum wage, overtime, better record keeping for employers, limited working hours, and bans the employment of anyone under the age of 16. Before the bill was passed, there were over 300,000 workers making less than the federal minimum wage. Initially the federal minimum wage was .25 cents an hour. The plan was to raise the minimum wage a little bit every year for six years.  By 1941, the U.S. department of Labor reported that over 700,000 employees had been received more than the federal minimum wage, so by 1943 the federal minimum wage was bumped up to .40 cents on hour, two years before they planned to. By 1955, president Eisenhower and union organizers settled on the new minimum wage: 1$ an hour. This increased to the of over 2,000,000 southern workers, whose minimum wage .75 cents an hour. Overall, The FLSA was widely popular for the average american worker, as it bettered working conditions and pay in a way that no other legislation had. To this day we still rely on the FLSA and its rules for labor and on its protection of employees[^6].
# Title VII of the Civil Right Act of 1964

{% include feature/image.html filename="civil.JPG" alt="President Johnson signing the Civil Rights act of 1964" caption="President Johnson signing the Civil Rights act of 1964" width="100" link="https://history.house.gov/Exhibitions-and-Publications/Civil-Rights/1964-Essay/" %}

The civil rights act was some of the most important legislation in American history. It ended segregation in public places, and also ended discrimination in the workplace. Title VII of the 1964 civil rights act says: “a) Discriminatory practices prohibited; employees or applicants for employment subject to coverage” Title VII had multiple purposes, one of them was to lower African-American unemployment and underemployment. Sadly the results were not seen immediately, soon after the “Race Riots” erupted in cities all around America for the next few years. Title VII also had an effect on foreign policy. The civil rights act of 1964 was also a symbolic gesture to the world that America is a meritocracy, and that America doesn't discriminate against racial minorities. Title VII also had some weaknesses. It only combats future employment discrimination but does not deal with the racist attitudes of some Americans, but no legislation could completely solve that. One of the lasting effects of Title VII was the creation of the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. The EEOC is the government organization that investigates complaints of discrimination and enforces the law upon offenders. Today the EEOC deals with much more than just racism, but also sexism, discrimination of one's religion or ideals, and ableism. Though Title VII did not fix the unemployment rate for African Americans at the time, it paved the road for African Americans to have more equal opportunities, no longer could they not gain employment based on the color of their skin[^7].(Legally, plain racism was not outlawed) 
# Osha

{% include feature/image.html filename="nix.JPG" alt="Unofficial Portrait of President Nixon" caption="Unofficial Portrait of President Nixon" width="100" link="https://catalog.archives.gov/id/66394332" %}

One of the defining features of industrial work in America is the danger. The early 20th century marked some of the worst job safety and blatant disregard for employees' health in American history. It was not uncommon to be injured on the job site or even worse. Theoretically, American workers could sue companies for damages over an injury, but there is abundant documentation that many cases were either blacklisted or dismissed. In the 1970s, likely trying to win blue-collar votes, Richard Nixon supported and signed the Occupational Health and Safety Act. (OSH)  This would create the government organization OSHA. OSHA inspects and investigates working conditions in American businesses. They also enforce the law against violators of the OSHA working codes. Violations are evaluated based on Hazard Likelihood, Probability of effect, Severity of effect, and Range of effect. Each factor is rated on a scale of 1-4, with one being a rare occurrence, and four being a common occurrence. Businesses would be heavily fined, far more than what any state would fine for Health and Safety Violations. OSHA codified universal health and safety for all workers in America. Business owners could no longer afford to ignore the health and safety of their employees. A massive victory for workers’ rights was won[^8].
## Conclusion
The American working conditions of the early 20th century can not even compare to what they would be at the turn of the century. Over the course of 100 years, barbaric business practices such as child labor, unsafe working environments, underpaid labor, and sexist/racist discrimination from employment were no longer legal. Minimum wage, overtime, and universal health and safety on the job site are all basic requirements for businesses to this day. Worker's rights advocates fought long and hard for a better place to work, and in the end, the Workers Won, and America is now a land of fair labor practices. It is all thanks to the Men, Women, and Children that suffered so we didn’t have to. 

## Notes
 
[^1]:Bemis, Edward W. “The Homestead Strike.” University of Chicago Press, June 1894, pp. 381–384., https://doi.org/https://www.jstor.org/stable/1819234. :Stowell, Myron R. “Chapter 3.” Fort Frick," or the Siege of Homestead, Pittsburg Printing Co, Pittsburg, PA, 1893, pp. 37–44. 

[^2]:Mayer, Gerald, et al. “PDF.” CRS Report for Congress, 4 June 2013 pp 1-8. :White, Frank Marshall. “The Babies Who Work.” Harpers Weekly, 1 Jan. 1910, pp. 13–14. :Massachusetts Child Labor Commitee. The Eight Hour Day for Children under 16, Massachusetts Child Labor Commitee, Boston, MA, 1913. 

[^3]:Fink, Walter H. “Massacre of the Innocents.” The Ludlow Massacre, Revealing the Horrors of Rule by Hired Assassins of Industry and Telling as Well of the Thirty Years War Waged by Colorado Coal Miners against Corporation-Owned State & County Officials to Secure an Enforcement of the Laws, Denver, Williamson-Haffner, Printers, 1914, pp. 8–15. :Walker, Mark. “The Ludlow Massacre: Class, Warfare, and Historical Memory in Southern Colorado.” Remembering Landscapes of Conflict, vol. 37, no. 3, 2003, pp. 66–70., https://doi.org/https://www-jstor-org.uidaho.idm.oclc.org/stable/25617081?seq=1. 

[^4]:Farrell, Jeff. “Henry Ford's Anti-Semitism: A Rhetorical Analysis of the ‘Paranoid’ Style.” University of Nevada, University of Nevada, 1999. Pp 6-10 :FORD, HENRY. My Life and Work. DIGIREADS COM PUBLISHING, 2020. Pp 60-66 :Wagnalls, Adam W, et al. “Henry Ford's Five-Day Week.” The Literary Digest, 29 Apr. 1922. Pp 8

[^5]:Golden, Claudia D. “The Role of World War II in the Rise of Women's Employment.” Jstor, vol. 81, no. 4, Sept. 1991, pp 741-743 :McEuen, Melissa A. “Women, Gender, and World War II.” Oxford Research Encyclopedia of American History, 2016, :War Manpower Commission United States Employment Service. If Hitler Came to Mobile, National Archives. 

[^6]:Samuel, Howard D. “Troubled Passage: the Labor Movement and the Fair Labor Standards Act.” Monthly Labor Review, 2000, pp. 34–37., https://doi.org/https://www.bls.gov/opub/mlr/author/samuel-howard-d.htm. :“Bourbon Employers Oppose Fair Labor Standards Act.” Montana Labor News, 25 May 1939, p. 2. :“1$ Minimum Wage Law, Hundreds of Others Signed By Eisenhower.” Nome Nugget, 15 Aug. 1955, p. 2. Library of Congress

[^7]:Brown, Paulette. “The Civil Rights Act of 1964.” Washington University Law Review, vol. 92, no. 2, 2014, pp. 9–12. :Henson, Chuck. “The Purposes of Title VII.” University of Missouri , 2019, pp. 1–12. :Civil Rights Act of 1964 § 7, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq (1964).
  
[^8]:“Overview.” US EEOC, U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, https://www.eeoc.gov/overview#:~:text=The%20U.S.%20Equal%20Employment%20Opportunity,national%20origin%2C%20age%20(40%20or.  :McKnight, James A. “Summary.” Training Course for Compliance Safety and Health Officers, Final Report, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 1972, pp. 5–15. :Noble, Charles. “The Origins of the Osh Act.” Liberalism at Work, 2019, pp. 89–94., https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctvn5tvk1.8. 
